1. DDL
    - data definition language - is part of sql, responsible for database structure, but not the data in the rows itself
    with DDL we:
        1. create tables
        2. altering its structure
        3. deleting tables and others objects
        4. creating indexes, schemes, sometimes views
    main commands:
        CREATE, ALTER, DROP, RENAME
    constraints - restrictions that control the allowed data - PRIMARY / FOREIGN KEY, UNIQUE, NOT NULL, CHECK, DEFAULT

2. DML
    - data manipulation language - is part of sql, responsible for manipulating the actual data stored in database
    tables
    main commands:
        INSERT, DELETE, UPDATE (important to use with WHERE), SELECT
    usually all dml operations are executed in transactions

3. indexes
    - index is a data structure that improves the speed of data retrieval operations by allowing the database to find
    rows without scanning the whole table
    usually index is a B-tree
    indexes are useful in operations using WHERE, JOIN, ORDER BY, GROUP BY
    index types:
        1. primary index (primary key) - unique, not null, autoincrement
        2. unique index - guarantees uniqueness, used for search
        3. non-unique index - simple index
        4. composite index - index for multiple columns, where order is important, because the efficiency of the index
        is descending from left to right - it's called leftmost prefix rule
    but indexes increase storage usage and slow down write operations such as insert, update and delete, because they
    must be updated.
    indexes can be clustered and non-clustered:
        a clustered index defines the physical order of rows in the table, so the data itself stored in the index order
        thus in a table can only be 1 clustered index
        a non-clustered index stores indexed value along with pointers to the actual row, so it requires an additional
        lookup

4. triggers
    - a trigger is a database object that automatically executes a defined action in response to certain events on a
    table, such as INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE
    trigger is always connected with the event (INSERT, UPDATE...) and execution moment (BEFORE, AFTER)
    triggers have pseudo recordings NEW (new string version) and OLD (old string version)
    triggers are often used in audit logs, automatic insertions (but often ORM does it), aggregations.
    but there are disadvantages:
        1. hidden logic
        2. may be hard to maintain (logic can be smeared across the database)
        3. unexpected side effects
        4. can be performance problems

5. views
    - a view is a virtual table defined by sql query. it does not store any data but dynamically retrieves it from
    the underlying tables
    they are used to:
        1. simplify difficult queries
        2. logic reusability
        3. security
    there is also materialized views it is similar, but this one stores the query result, thus it is often faster but
    u have to refresh the data

6. functions
    - a function is a database object that takes input parameters, performs some logic and returns a value
    there are built-in function and user functions
    built-in functions:
        1. COUNT()
        2. SUM()
        3. AVG()
        4. NOW()
        5. LOWER()
        6. UPPER()
        7. LENGTH()
    function types:
        1. scalar function - returns one value (INT / VARCHAR / DECIMAL)
        2. table-valued function - returns table (mysql does not have it)
    usually functions = read-only logic; cannot use COMMIT/ROLLBACK; cannot use DDL
    - performance (function is executed for each row)
    - if u wrap a column with function, index is not used
    + logic reusability
    + readability
    + encapsulation

7. procedures
    - procedure is a database object that encapsulates a sequence of SQL statements and can be executed to perform
    operations on the database
    the key difference between functions and procedures: function - return some value, procedure - perform an operation.
    unlike functions, it can perform DDL: INSERT, DELETE, UPDATE, several operations in a row, loops

8. DROP vs TRUNCATE
    - DROP completely removes the table: its data and structure, while TRUNCATE deletes all rows but keeps the table
    intact

9. joins
    - joins are used to combine rows from two or more tables based on a related column between them
    main types of join:
        1. INNER JOIN (default JOIN) - returns only matching rows from both tables
        2. LEFT JOIN - returns all the rows from the left table, and related rows from the right one
        3. RIGHT JOIN - vice versa
        4. FULL OUTER JOIN - returns all the rows from both tables (not all DBMS have it)
        5. CROSS JOIN - returns all combinations of rows from both tables

10. ACID
    - ACID are transaction principles; A - atomicity - principle of all-or-nothing; C - consistency - a transaction
    moves the database from one valid state to another valid; I - isolation - transactions do not interfere each other;
    D - durability - once committed, data is permanently saved.

11. CAP
    - CAP theorem states that in distributed system, it is impossible to simultaneously guarantee consistency,
    availability and partition tolerance
        1. consistency - all nodes see the same data at the same moment
        2. availability - system always replies
        3. partition tolerance - system keeps working even having lost connection or sum
    the most important - partition tolerance; thus we got the following choice:
        1. CP (consistency + partition tolerance) - if connection lost - it is okay for system not to reply (bank
        systems, transactions) - it's better not to answer rather give wrong data
        2. AP (availability + partition tolerance) - if connection lost - system replies, but it is okay if data can be
        outdated (social networks, analytics, cache) - it's better to answer at least somehow