1. what is docker and what it's difference form virtual machines?
    - docker is a platform that allows u to package an application and all its dependencies into a lightweight, isolated
    environment called a container. unlike virtual machines, docker containers use one shared host core and are more
    lightweight and faster to start, while VMs include a full OS and provide stronger isolation.

2. what main components does docker-image include?
    - base layer (base image: FROM), application code (COPY / ADD), runtime dependencies (RUN php, node...), env config
    (ENV, ports), executable commands (CMD, ENTRYPOINT).

3. what is Dockerfile and what instructions can we define there?
    - dockerfile represents instructions of docker-image creation. includes base layer (base image: FROM), application
    code (COPY / ADD), runtime dependencies (RUN php, node...), env config (ENV, ports), executable commands (CMD,
    ENTRYPOINT).

4. what similar technologies exists and how do they differ from Docker?
    - main analogs: Podman (daemonless), containerd, runC. while docker is an integrated application, unifying in it self
    all the instruments of creation, building, distribution and launch of containers, others are either daemonless or
    low-level runtime.

5. what advantages docker has comparing with the analogs?
    - besides its performance advantage: lightweight, high speed, close to native performance, - it is easy to use,
    mature ecosystem, standardized tooling, strong integration with development and deployment workflows.

6. how to use docker compose for an application deployment, consisting of web-service, php and database MySQL?
    - u gotta make docker-compose.yml, where u are to specify 3 services: php-fpm, nginx, mysql. also in the yml
    u should specify ports, volumes and env values.

7. what is volume in docker?
    - it is a mechanism for storing and sharing data outside of a container's filesystem, what makes it consistent
    even after container deletion.

8. how to use network in docker for communication between services?
    - the easiest way is to specify network in docker-compose.yml (services:
                                                                     app:
                                                                       image: my-app-image
                                                                       networks:
                                                                         - my-network
                                                                     db:
                                                                       image: postgres:16
                                                                       networks:
                                                                         - my-network

                                                                   networks:
                                                                     my-network:
                                                                       driver: bridge)
    also u may create it manually by the command docker network create my-network, and in the sequel run containers
    specifying this network.

9. how to make data backup and restore in docker?
    - database backup:
        docker exec container_name \ mysqldump -u root -p db_name > backup.sql
        restore: docker exec -i container_name \ mysql -u root -p db_name < backup.sql
    bind mount backup:
        cp -r ./data ./backup

10. what ways of docker-image performance optimization exist?
    - the usage of lightweight images (slim base images); usage of .dockerignore where we specify .git, node_modules,
    logs, cache; also it's recommended to build image so that rarely changing steps go earlier, frequently changing -
    later; combine commands in one RUN and clear cache; COPY only needed files.

11. how to deploy an application in production-env using docker compose?
    - u prepare production-ready images, define services in docker-compose.yml, configure environment variables,
    volumes, networks, and then start the stack on a server with docker compose up -d.

12. what instruments and best practices u know for providing application security and monitoring in docker?
    - keep images updated (regularly rebuild images and update), scan images for vulnerabilities, do not store secrets
    in images, use .dockerignore, use trusted repositories;
    docker-specific security instruments:
        Trivy - image and filesystem vulnerability scanner;
        Docker scout - helps inspect image vulnerabilities and base image health;
        Hadolint - dockerfile linter;